First we identify the opportunity.
Here a machine-learning classifier can be employed to bypass a message queue.
This can cut down response times and increase patient satisfaction.
Furthermore, we reduce the risk associated with
delays in responding to urgent medical needs,
which gives us an increase in our quality of medical care.
Second, we obtain the data.
In this case we will need a large sample of patient messages that vary in their content.
This initially may involve simply extracting data from a data warehouse,
but in production might require ETL pipelines to bring data to the production system.
We will ultimately also need to have the correct classifications for those messages,
medical versus non-medical or urgent versus non-urgent.
So we can train a machine learning algorithm to do this automatically.
Third, we need to prepare the data.
In this case we will need the message data and all metadata,
that is data besides message content that includes characteristics of the sender,
timing of the message and so forth.
All of this data needs to be cleaned and prepared
in structured form for analysis by a machine-learning model.
Fourth, we must identify modeling approaches.
Here we are looking at a supervised learning task with classification.
Messages must be classified as medical or non-medical and as urgent or non-urgent.
As such, our modeling approaches would include
classification algorithms such as deep learning approaches,
or iterative approaches such as a random forest or gradient boosted machine.
We would also identify approaches for carrying out
the natural language processing required of classifying text content.
In this particular case we may choose for example
a TFIDF approach to scoring text features extracted from messages.
Next we partition our data.
We typically choose the majority of data as a training set.
That is, the data that we will use to train the model to classify messages.
A common tactic here is to choose say 70 percent of the data as our training data.
The remainder of this data represents our test set.
This data is held out for model training to provide
an unbiased set of data on which to test model performance.
We typically randomly partition data to the training and test sets and may stratify
this randomization if there are
particular characteristics that must be represented across both data sets.
In a sixth step,
we build and evaluate models based on our training data.
As mentioned before, we may consider deep learning models and
other iterative classifiers such as tree-based methods or a support vector machine.
We evaluate based on how accurately they classify
messages according to various fit statistics and model performance measures.
We use business context to prioritize
the fit measures that are most critical to evaluate the task at hand.
For example, we may prioritize the minimization of
false positives or false negatives or maximize specificity or sensitivity,
or optimize for precision or recall.
You do not need to know all the definitions of these measures.
They are all characteristics of model fit
and you may pay particular attention to one or another
depending on the consequences of the model failing to identify certain priority cases.
Once we have selected our best-performing model,
our seventh step involves deploying that model.
The particulars of deployment will depend on the use case.
In this case, we may choose to host the model in
a Cloud environment accessible via API calls.
Models can also be integrated into applications
or can stand alone and generate classifications in more of a batch mode.
Once our model is deployed into production,
our final step involves maintaining this production model.
We must monitor the performance of our model to protect against
drift or degraded performance over time.
We must periodically re-train our model using a new updated training
set to ensure that we're reflecting
the full set of messages that may need to be classified.
Finally, we may choose to rollback and redeploy
a new model that performs better than the one currently in production.
I hope this example has provided
helpful contexts for the steps involved in the data science process.
Data science projects differ substantially,
but regardless of the particular context,
all projects follow the steps outlined here.